---
layout: default
title: "Home"
nav_order: 1
---

# Phrasing Insurrection: A Computational Study of the Grammars of Collective Enslaved Resistance in the *South Carolina Gazette* and *Virginia Gazette* between 1732 and 1775

## Table of Contents
- [About the author](about.md)
- [Project Description](project-description.md)
- [Why Digital History?](why-digital-history.md)
- [Methodology and Data](methodology-and-data.md)
- [Tools and Resources](tools-and-resources.md)

This study explores how digital methods, such as text mining and computational corpus linguistics, can inform novel research questions and approaches to what we can know about white colonial conceptions of collective enslaved resistance in the eighteenth century. Moreover, my research implores scholars to engage with interdisciplinary methods to critically re-examine how lanugage, like numeracy, mechanized systems of knowing and knowledge regimes reinforced by the rise of hereditary racial slavery in early American history. 

> “Language, incontestably, reveals the speaker. Language, also, far more dubiously, is meant to define the other—and, in this case, the other is refusing to be defined by a language that has never been able to recognize him. People evolve a language in order to describe and thus control their circumstances, or in order not to be submerged by a reality that they cannot articulate. (And, if they cannot articulate it, they are submerged.)” - James Baldwin, “If Black English Isn’t a Language, Then Tell Me, What Is?” (1979)

This thesis employs digital methods to re-examine the well-trod archives of North American colonial newspapers’ coverage of collective enslaved resistance, experimentally represented by text data derived from the South Carolina Gazette and Virginia Gazette between the 1730s and 1770s, to investigate new dimensions in the relationship between black unrest and grammar in South Carolina and Virginia’s colonial press. I employ careful computational analysis of grammatical features alongside such sources as slave trade data, colonial legislation, and secondary scholarship to examine how the rhetoric published in the South Carolina Gazette and Virginia Gazette reflected regional, colonial, and imperial conceptions of enslaved resistance.

Digital methods, which render visible relatively understudied linguistic patterns in the South Carolina Gazette and Virginia Gazette’s reports on enslaved resistance, are a window into how we might clarify the social and psychological processes that both disrupted and rationalized hereditary racial slavery in eighteenth century North America. In doing so, this research project engages with the theories and conceptual frameworks set forth in postcolonial scholarship, data science, data feminism, computational linguistics and literary studies, and digital humanities.

By engaging with eighteenth century colonial grammar through the rhetoric of collective enslaved resistance published in the South Carolina Gazette and the Virginia Gazette, this thesis historicizes the moments in which the collective actions of enslaved men and women fundamentally shaped white enslavers socio-linguistic prerogatives. As a preliminary investigation into the utility of text mining for historical analysis of the colonial rhetoric of collective enslaved resistance, this study illustrates how, even with small amounts of text data, digital methods afford nuanced perspectives on the dynamic relationship between language structure and contemporary events, ideologies, and political climates. Moreover, the temporal and lexical distance afforded by digital methods allows us to see larger patterns in how reports in the South Carolina Gazette and Virginia Gazette represented collective enslaved resistance over time.

The integration of digital methods and traditional modes of historical inquiry suggests that the emerging pattern of linguistic distinctions between “our slaves” and “such rebellious Negroes” in reports that referenced forms of black political violence reflected colonial authors cognitive work to reconcile evidence of black capacity with their own dependence upon and proximity to forced black labor.  Unlike colonial reports that included phrases such as “our slaves” or “our negroes” in the first two decades of the South Carolina Gazette and Virginia Gazette’s publishing, phrases such as “the rebellious Negroes” only occurred in instances where black political violence came to fruition. The perspective afforded by computational analysis of possessive pronouns and modifying adjectives in Corpus One and Corpus Two, thus, supports the idea that from their earliest years of publication the arbiters of information in Williamsburg and Charleston mobilized grammar and word choice to propagate linguistic descriptions of black unrest that reproduced enslaved men and women as outside the category of kin and property.

Analysis of text data from the latter half of the eighteenth century indicates that where white colonists’ linguistic qualities of defiance could be rationalized within the frameworks of white supremacy and Western rationalism, narratives in the colonial press that emphasized black insurgents’ rebelliousness foreclosed white enslavers conceptions of their social and financial value. Although computational analysis of linguistic patterns, such as frequency of pronouns, do not illustrate a clear emergence of white authors’ use of “we” within the contexts of the rhetoric of collective enslaved resistance and the American Revolution, they do suggest that during the late 1760s and 1770s white authors more consistently employed third person pronouns to describe enslaved insurgents and conspirators—delineating the qualifications of social and political belonging. In addition, passive voice remained the predominant mode of white authors descriptions of the outcomes and consequences of collective enslaved resistance over the course of the eighteenth century. Yet, computational analysis of passive and active voice constructions in articles from the Virginia Gazette published in the 1770s, suggests that the slight resurgence in the use of active voice reflected white colonial authors contemporary prerogatives to reframe themselves as active participants in the violent suppression of enslaved resistance.

Thus, while this study primarily focused on how computational analysis of text data can reveal nuances of regional, colonial, and imperial grammatical representations of collective enslaved resistance between the 1730s and 1770s, as a case study it highlights the idea that with greater access to carefully derived text data from the colonial press, that we may be able to engage with even more complex questions. For instance, how can digital methods provide new windows into reconsidering and historicizing the frequent grammatical absence of enslaved black women in reports regarding black political violence?  Can we better use data to analyze historical positionality of colonial authors? How did the grammar of colonial response to enslaved resistance published in Northern colonies like Pennsylvania and New York newspapers compare to those with large, enslaved populations like South Carolina and Virginia? In what ways did subsequent revolutions, such as the Haitian Revolution, consolidate and reshape the structure of linguistic representations of black political violence? And how did nineteenth century African American newspapers and authors adapt these grammatical habits to reconstruct their own memories and conceptions of the legacy and utility of black political violence?  Did black men and women draw upon these grammars in similar ways?

The many uses of the grammar of the colonial rhetoric of enslaved resistance, revealed by computational analysis of the *South Carolina Gazette* and the *Virginia Gazette*, persist today. Iterative distinctions between “us” and “them” continue to punctuate media outlets racialized distortions of protestors, such as those in the Ferguson demonstrations, as well as in the language of the United States criminal justice and carceral systems, media coverage of global conflicts, and the violent rhetoric of modern American citizenship and immigration.  As the journalist Nathan Robinson reminds us, grammatical tools such as the passive voice, which was ever-present in the *South Carolina Gazette* and *Virginia Gazette*, are some of “the favorite rhetorical tool of propagandists worldwide, who ‘regret the mistakes that were made’ without having to admit who made them.”  Thus, this thesis acts as a reminder that by engaging with interdisciplinary methods to locate the consolidations and adaptations of the grammars of collective enslaved resistance, we can chart—and further dismantle—the structural legacies of colonial newspapers’ representations of black political violence. 
